The known objects surrounding the Milky Way (MW) show an anisotropic spatial distribution. Lynden-Bell (1976) and Kunkel & Demers (1976) were the first to notice that dSphs Sculptor, Draco, Ursa Minor and globular cluster Palomar 13, apparently lied on the orbital plane of the Magellanic stream, therefore polar to the Galaxy. Soon after, Fornax, Leo I, Leo II, Sextans, Phoenix and some classified as ‘young halo’ globular clusters, were also found to participate of this “great circle” (Lynden-Bell 1982; Majewski 1994; Fusi Pecci et al. 1995). The existence of a “plane of satellites” in the MW was finally ratified when measuring the very flattened distribution of the 11 classical satellites as compared to isotropy (Kroupa et al. 2005; Metz et al. 2007). In our neighboring galactic system Andromeda (M31), the first studies by Grebel et al. (1999) and Koch & Grebel (2006) on the then-known 􏰀15 dwarf galaxies within ∼500 kpc distance, found that the subsample of dSph/dE type dwarfs also lied near a “great circle”. This spatial anisotropy was emphasized by the skewness of M31 dwarfs in the direction to the MW (McConnachie & Irwin 2006). More recently, the ad- dition to the picture of newly discovered faint satellites thanks to surveys like SDSS (York et al. 2000) or PAndAS (McConnachie et al. 2009), and an increased quality of distance measurements, has only enhanced the significance of the planar structures noted in the MW and M31 (Metz et al. 2009; Kroupa et al. 2010; Ibata et al. 2013; Conn et al. 2013; Pawlowski et al. 2013; Pawlowski & Kroupa 2014; Pawlowski et al. 2015). In addition, a richer census of young halo globular clusters and several stellar/gaseous streams have been shown to also align with the MW satellites (Keller et al. 2012; Pawlowski et al. 2012). Finally, apart from the MW and M31, there are claims for a planar distribution of satellites in the nearby Centaurus A Group of galaxies (Tully et al. 2015), further supported by discoveries of new dwarfs and better distance estimates (Mu ̈ller et al. 2016, 2018).
In the last years, the quantification of such planar alignments has gained increasing importance in order to unambiguously define the observed structures in terms of their orientation and charac- teristics. These quantifications have demanded increasingly more sophisticated methods that make use of the three-dimensional posi- tion data as well as statistical approaches to overcome measurement uncertainties or avoid spurious effects coming from working with a small sample number.
Specifically, Koch & Grebel (2006) used an error-weighted or- thogonal distance regression accompanied by bootstrapped tests, to reliably determine a robust solution for estimating best-fit planes. They fitted a plane to all possible subsamples of M31 satellites in- volving 3 to 15 members and projected the resulting normal vectors on a sphere. With the density distribution of normals they found an estimation of the normal direction to the broad planar distribution defined by the satellites’ positions. Metz et al. (2007, 2009) used in- stead the Tensor of Inertia plane-fitting method taking into account distance uncertainties. More recently, Pawlowski et al. (2013) com- bined the previous efforts and presented a new statistical method to define the direction of predominant plane-like spatial distribu- tions of satellites within a given sample: the ‘4-galaxy-normal den- sity plot’ method, consisting of a planar fit to every combination of 4 satellites. From its application to the confirmed satellites within 300 kpc in the MW and M31 they obtained the normal direction to one predominant planar alignment of satellites in each galactic sys- tem. In this way, the so-called “VPOS-3” (Vast Polar Structure) and “GPoA” (Great Plane of Andromeda) planes were defined, consist- ing of 24 and 19 satellites respectively. These planes have been con- sidered so far to be the most relevant satellite planar configurations in the MW and M31, and have been used as a benchmark against which to test the alignment of the newest (unclassified) objects dis- covered (Pawlowski & Kroupa 2014; Pawlowski et al. 2015). How- ever, an identification of the “best” planes of satellites in the MW and M31 formed by a variable number of members is still lacking. This identification demands an analysis of how the quality of these planes changes with the number of satellites included.
The purpose of this paper is to present a more detailed quan- tification and characterization of the plane-like spatial structures in the MW and M31 satellite systems. This is an important issue and, additionally, it will provide a reference with which to compare re- sults from numerical simulations analyses (Santos-Santos in prep.). We will focus on the positions of satellites, which for the MW have error bars much smaller than those of kinematic data. We note, however, that complementary, relevant information to satellite pla- nar alignments comes from kinematic data. Indeed, recent proper motions for MW satellites measured with GAIA (Gaia Collabora- tion et al. 2018) suggest that a non-negligible fraction of them are orbiting within the VPOS (Fritz et al. 2018). For M31 satellites just line-of-sight velocities (Ibata et al. 2013) are currently available.
In this work we build on the results of Pawlowski et al. (2013) and develop an extension to their ‘4-galaxy-normal density plot’ method that enables a deeper study on cataloguing and quality anal- yses of planes of satellites. In particular, for each predominant pla- nar configuration of satellites in the MW and M31 found with the previous method, we yield a collection of planes of satellites with an increasing number of members, and identify the highest-quality planes in terms of the Tensor of Inertia parameters. In particular, a plane’s quality is quantified in terms of its population (Nsat) and flattening (the concentration ellipsoid short-to-long axis ratio c/a or, equivalently, the r.m.s. thickness normal to the plane; CRAMR 1999). Quality of planes with the same population or flattening can be compared with each other, allowing to single-out best quality planes with the same Nsat or c/a values.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we present the sample and dataset of MW and M31 satellites studied. In Sec. 3 we thoroughly describe our methodology. Secs. 4.1 and 4.2 show the results of our quality analysis for planes in the MW and M31, respectively. Finally Sec. 5 summarizes our conclusions.
2 MW AND M31 DATA
In this study we use the same satellite samples as in Pawlowski et al.
(2013), consisting of 27 and 34 satellites for the MW and M31, re-
spectively. These are the confirmed satellites within 300 kpc from
their hosts, according to the McConnachie (2012) “Nearby dwarf
galaxy database”1 as on the 17th of June 2013. Therefore Canis
Major and AXXVII are considered here as dwarf galaxies although
their nature is debated (see Momany et al. 2004; Mart ́ınez-Delgado
et al. 2005; Mateu et al. 2009; Martin et al. 2016). Most proba-
ble satellite position values and their corresponding Gaussian width
uncertainties in the radial Sun - satellite distance have been taken
from this database, as summarized in Pawlowski et al. (2013) Table
2. The sample analyzed in this paper considers all the classical plus
SDSS satellites. We will ignore the more recently discovered dwarf
galaxy candidates (see for example Bechtol et al. 2015; Koposov
et al. 2015) which originate from a wide variety of sources/surveys,
for the sake of consistency with Pawlowski et al. (2013), and for
simplicity as far as comparisons are concerned (see also Pawlowski
2
literature which we will compare to (defined considering the same sample of satellites) are listed in Table 1. This Table shows the properties (see next section for property definitions) of these ob- served planes as reported by the most up-to-date studies. For the MW these planes are: the so-called classical (i.e., the 11 most lumi- nous MW satellites, see Metz et al. 2007), the VPOSall (Pawlowski et al. 2013, defined by all the 27 confirmed satellites within 300 kpc), and the VPOS-3 (Pawlowski et al. 2013, defined by 24 out of 27 of the VPOSall satellites). For M31, there is the plane of satel- lites noted by Ibata et al. (2013) and Conn et al. (2013) with the PAndAS survey, which we will consider with 14 satellites (as ana- lyzed in Pawlowski et al. 2013, hereafter the ‘Ibata-Conn-14’ plane )3, and the so-called GPoA (Pawlowski et al. 2013), with 19 mem- bers (the 14 of the ‘Ibata-Conn-14’ plane plus 5 more). We note that other planes of satellites in the Local Group have been sug- gested in Shaya & Tully (2013), but under the consideration of a different initial sample of satellites than that used here. In particu- lar, they define 4 satellite planes (2 in the MW and 2 in M31). The so-called “plane 1” includes a majority of satellites that participate in the GPoA, while “plane 4” is basically a reduced version of the classical plane in the MW plus dwarf galaxy Phoenix.
1 http://www.astro.uvic.ca/ alan/Nearby_Dwarf_  ̃
Database_files/NearbyGalaxies.dat
2 As shown in Pawlowski & Kroupa (2014); Pawlowski et al. (2015), the majority of the recently discovered dwarf galaxy candidates in the MW align with the VPOS. While their consideration in our analysis would pro- duce different results to those presented here, the same conclusions remain regarding the general quality behaviour of the MW planar structures.
3 Pawlowski et al. (2013) did not consider AXVI as a satellite because it is further than 300 kpc away.
3 SEARCHING FOR PREDOMINANT PLANAR CONFIGURATIONS AND PLANE QUALITY ANALYSIS
Our method to find planar structures and assess their quality con- sists of 2 parts. The first part follows the ’4-galaxy-normal density plots’ method described in Pawlowski et al. (2013). This technique checks if there is a subsample of a given satellite sample that de- fines a dominant planar arrangement in terms of the outputs of the standard Tensor of Inertia (ToI) plane-fitting technique (see Metz et al. 2007; Pawlowski et al. 2013), based on an orthogonal-distance regression. In terms of the corresponding concentration ellipsoid, planes are characterized by:
• Nsat: the number of satellites in the subsample;
• ⃗n, the normal to the best fitting plane;
• c/a: the ellipsoid short-to-long axis ratio;
• b/a: the ellipsoid intermediate-to-long axis ratio;
• ∆RMS: the root-mean-square thickness perpendicular to the
best-fitting plane;
• Dcg: the distance from the center-of-mass of the main galaxy
to the plane.
These outputs are used to quantify the quality of planes. To begin with, a planar configuration must be flattened (i.e., low c/a), and, as opposed to filamentary, it also requires b/a ∼ 1 for an oblate distribution. High quality planes are those with a high Nsat, and a low c/a and ∆RMS, meaning they are populated and thin (plane quality as understood in this work will be specified in more detail at the end of the next section). Moreover, the plane normal ⃗n deter- mines the plane direction, for example in view of Aitoff projection purposes. Finally, a low Dcg means that the plane passes near the main galaxy’s center; a characteristic to be requested if the planes are expected to live within a potential making them dynamically stable, assuming that the host galaxy center is close to the center of the system’s gravitational potential well.
The second part of our methodology, which is the focus of this paper, is an extension to the 4-galaxy-normal density plot method, consisting of a quality analysis of the predominant planar arrange- ments found.
3.1 4-galaxy-normal density plot method
This method was presented in Sec. 2.4 of Pawlowski et al. (2013). We briefly summarize it and mention the procedure particularities followed in this study.
(i) A plane is fitted to every combination of four4 satellites’ po- sitions, using the ToI technique. The resultant normal vector (i.e. 4- galaxy-normal) and corresponding plane parameters are stored. To account for distance uncertainties, this step is repeated 100 times using 100 random positions per satellite, calculated using their cor- responding radial distance uncertainties.
(ii) Allthe4-galaxy-normals(fromall100realizations)arepro- jected on a regularly-binned sphere, assuming a Galactocentric co- ordinate system such that the MW’s disc spin vector points towards
the south pole. A density map (i.e. 2D-histogram) is drawn from the
projections, where each normal has been weighted by log 􏰁 a+b 􏰂 c
to emphasize planar-like spatial distributions. The over-density re- gions in these density maps (i.e. regions of 4-galaxy-normal accu- mulation) therefore signal the normal direction to a dominant pla- nar space-configuration. Satellites contributing 4-galaxy-normals to a given over-density are likely members of such a dominant plane. As opposite normal vectors indicate the same plane, density maps in this study are shown through Aitoff spherical projection diagrams in Galactic coordinates (longitude l, latitude b) within the l = [−90◦ , +90◦ ] interval.
(iii) We order bins by density value. The main over-density re- gion is identified around the highest value bin. Subsequent over- densities are identified by selecting the next bin, in order of decreas- ing density, which is separated more than 15◦ from the center of all the previously defined over-densities. In this way over-density re- gions are differentiated and isolated. For each of these regions, the midpoint of the highest-density bin will define the corresponding density peak’s coordinates.
(iv) We quantify how much a certain satellite s has contributed to a given density peak p (which we refer to as ’Cps’). To this end, we define an aperture angle of 15◦ around the density peak, se- lecting all 4-galaxy-normals within it. For each of them, the four contributing satellites are determined. A given satellite s is counted to contribute the 4-galaxy-normal’s weight to peak p. Therefore, its final contribution Cps, is the sum of weights corresponding to all the 4-galaxy-normals within the peak aperture that satellite s con- tributes to. Finally, all satellites are ordered by decreasing Cps to the density peak p, such that the first satellite is that which con- tributes most.
We note that changing the bin size used in our analysis does not modify our results, as we find the same overdensity regions. While it does slightly change the position found for the density peak cen- tres, the differences are small and do not modify the final order of satellites by Cps. Therefore the final results remain unaltered.
3.2 An extension to the method: plane quality analysis
To allow an individual and in-depth analysis of each overden- sity, we present an extension of the 4-galaxy-normal density plot method. Rather than a plane per overdensity, the extension will provide us with a collection of planes with a different number of satellites.
For each over-density p we initially fit a plane to the Nsat=7 satellites with highest Cps (i.e., the 7 satellites that contribute most to 4-galaxy-normals within 15◦ of the density peak), and store the resultant plane parameters. This number Nsat=7 is low enough to allow for an analysis of ToI parameter behaviour as Nsat increases, and at the same time high enough that we begin with populated planes. Note that taking instead Nsat = 7 ± 2 to begin with does not alter our conclusions.
Then, the next satellite in order of decreasing Cps is added to the group of satellites. Again a plane is fitted to their positions and the parameters stored. This plane-fitting process is repeated until all contributing satellites are used.
To include the effect of distance uncertainties, in practice we calculate 1000 random positions per satellite, and fit 1000 planes at each iteration with Nsat satellites. The final results at each Nsat correspond to the mean values from these random realizations and the corresponding errors to the standard deviations.
In this way, for each over-density found we obtain a collec- tion or catalog of planes of satellites, each plane consisting of an
increasing number of members, as well as the quality indicators for each of them.
In this work “high quality” means populated and flattened
planes. This is quantified through Nsat and c/a (and/or ∆RMS,
note that they are very often correlated; see Pawlowski & McGaugh
2014). Being a two-parameter notion, to compare planes’ qualities
we need that either Nsat is constant or that c/a is constant (or that
at least it varies very slowly with Nsat). In the first case, lower c/a
means higher quality. In the second case, more populated planes are
rated as of higher quality. Another case when comparison is possi-
ble is when one plane is more flattened and populated than another:
the first has a higher quality than the second. These considerations
have been applied to the different member planes in the collection
obtained for each density peak, allowing us to make quality com-
parisons, in particular with already determined planes, and, very interestingly, to single out new high-quality ones.
